Graduated from A&M in 1935 and went to teach in San
Gabriel. In two years' time, I left to go to Alfie,
but I had one of the most remarkable experiences
that I ever had in San Gabriel. The secretary of the
school board and I were absolutely like twin
sisters. And he had a history that I'd like to write
his biography, but I can't get my own written. But
Jamie Clark was the secretary of the school board,
and he approached the people by saying, WPA is
building schoolhouses, and we can get a grant to
build a schoolhouse. So he asked the people, to
vote a $5,000 bond to build a schoolhouse. Had the
architects draw up an eight-classroom
gymnasium-type schoolhouse, 256 feet long and 50
feet wide and with a gymnasium on the back. And
after it got started, He barely got the foundation
laid. He didn't quite get it all finished before he
had to have another bond issue. And by the time he
got the second bond issue, while we got the walls up
top of the level of the ground, and we had to have
another. And I said, Jamie, you knew that you
couldn't build a schoolhouse for what you have
gotten so far. He said, well, yes, I know. But he
said, my son asked me for a nickel one morning. And
then he asked me a nickel after breakfast. And he
asked me for a nickel. He said, at the end of the day,
he said, Daddy, here's this $0.25 I asked you for.
And so he got enough money to build a schoolhouse.
And I was put in charge of the laying of the rock on
that schoolhouse. And I spent more time. somebody
else took my responsibility so that I just had
vocational agriculture and schoolhouse. And
when we had gotten that wall that was ten feet
underground and eighteen feet above the ground
and two pieces of girders that were sixty-six
inches, sixty-six feet, two inches tall ready to
be joined by bolts in the center of the arch. And
when those were raised, there wasn't a plow in the
field in San Gabriel when I told them when we'd
raise the
girders for the gymnasium. And I want you to know
that whenever that first girder went up there and
went down into those bolts that were 18 inches in
that stone wall, And then lift let it down on the
other side and it went down. And it did so because I
had enlarged the 8. 5H hole. The two 5H holes
together so that I had 10 inches on each end. And
when we raised those four girders in less than two
hours. I could have walked off of that top of that
house without touching a thing but air until I got
to the ground. There was a 20-year-old individual
in charge of a project that was employing 75,000,
75 people. I was really a happy young man, I
guarantee. Now, go ahead. Describe what it was
like to... What were your classes, and describe
the students then.
The students that we had at the high school were
farm people. There were three different ethnic
groups in the community. There were Czechs, there
were Germans, and then there were white folks. And
they were so designated. And Jamie and I were the
only people that could get along with all three
ethnic groups. And I wanted to take a German boy to
the state contest in debate one time. And I went to
see the daddy of the boy and asked him if he could go
with us. And he said, well, yes, I reckon he can go.
But said, all you're doing is teaching him to run
around, and I've got to teach him to work. That's
his attitude.
One man, when I took him home, he lived up on the
hill, and it wasn't gravel. And I took the boy home
at night, 10 o'clock. And the boy got into his
parents' yard, and his dad heard something out
there, and he got his shotgun and shot his son full
of bullets. Buckshot? Buckshot. And I want you to
know that they took him to Temple and he wasn't
fatally injured and so forth. But I was afraid of
that man ever since then. You were responsible for
teaching what courses? Well, I taught a seventh
class one semester. And then at one time I taught a
fifth grade class for one semester. And the rest of
the time I was teaching vocational agriculture
and working on the building. And the people in the
ag education department told me that I either had
to quit building the schoolhouse or, and I got a job
at Alvin. During those years at San Gabriel and
then in Alvin, What clearly were the rules of
behavior and conduct for a young teacher? They may
not have been written down, but what did you know?
They clearly were that you had no contact of any
kind with the students.
I had a girl that was a sophomore, and she brought
roses to me every day. And when I went back to one of
the reunions 40 years later, one of the girls said,
well, every girl in the class had a crush on you. But
remember, I still looked like I was 19 years old.
And I wasn't much older than that, but I knew
better. What about things like movies and smoking
and dancing?
We were so far apart. a way that we didn't have those
things. We were strictly a rural community. And I
had a rule that the boys could not smoke in the back
seat of my car. And if they had to smoke, they'd have
to ride in the front seat with me. Was it all right
for you to smoke as a teacher? Yeah, it did. It was at
that time. I turned down one job when I was out on the
interview because of school. They asked me if I'd
quit smoking if I got the job. And I said, no. I said,
every one of you got a cigarette tray in front of
you, and you asked me to say if I'd quit smoking, I
will have your job. And that was Riesel, Texas.
Could you go to a pool hall? No. Were you expected to
be a churchgoer? I
didn't really feel like. that there was any
compunction, but I was. But you didn't think that
that was a requirement? That's right. And you went
then to Alvin. Describe those years. Well, the
first two years I was unmarried, and I got involved
with Future Farmers there.
Finally, we We had two projects that we were
interested in. One of them was a Jersey cattle
business, and we bought Jersey cattle from R.E.
Hildebrandt in San Antonio, Jersey cash for our
club, and he gave us a Jersey bull. And then we
bought pigs from former Governor Ross Sterling.
And at that time, the governor was using his help to
have a sausage route. And I was told that he made his
living peddling whole hog sausage in Houston.
That Jesse Jones had caused his financial empire
to collapse because Jesse Jones told him to do
something in Texas from Washington, and he said,
I'm governor of Texas. But he was a real
interesting individual. My boys were delighted
to know that they'd been at the home of the
ex-governor of Texas.
I took a group of boys one time to the Fort Worth Fat
Stock Show with their livestock. And when we were
there, I had told them specifically that not one of
them could get drunk when they were out with me, and
some of them did. And when I got back to Alvin and
reported to the superintendent what had
happened, he didn't uphold me in the decision that
I had made, that I had explicitly told him. was a
part of their trip. And so that's when I decided to
get out of school teaching. And I spent
from June 1st to October 1st on R.E. Hildebrandt's
dairy farm. Now, this is what year? 1939. 1941.
Now, then
that fall, what did you do? I was in the Army. I went
into the Army on October
13th, 1941. Where were you when you heard the news
of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor? I was in
church with a friend of ours from Columbus,
Georgia, who had
relatives in Montgomery, Alabama, and they
didn't have any transportation, so I took them to
visit their relatives And we went to church in
Montgomery, Alabama, about 80 miles from
Columbus. And when I heard about the attack after
our noon meal, I took off immediately to go back to
the barracks in Fort Benning.
And what did you and your fellow officers and
enlisted men think was going to happen? Well, now,
then I was living in an officer's barrack. We had no
contact with enlisted men until... What did you
and your fellow officers do? We went around and
holding up our orders, and it said, unless sooner
relieved, you will go back to your civilian
occupation. And then everybody looked at
everybody else and said, you know what that means?
And that means we'll be in here a long time. I had a
fantastic career at the infantry school. I went
over there as a first lieutenant. Since I had been a
teacher, they kept me to be an instructor at Fort
Benning. And within five months after I started my
instruction, I was promoted to captain. And nine
months later, I was promoted to major. When I left
there, that was the last promotion I had till I was
discharged as Lieutenant Colonel. And how long
were you at the infantry school? Two years. I went
in and took one course. And then when I was relieved
of my responsibility, I spent a period of time
there till I got my majority. And then I went to the
field grade officer's class and spent two nearly a
year of my time there. All right. After that, where
were you? I went to Brownwood.
Camp Bowie. Camp Bowie.
I was sent to Camp Bowie to be cadre for the new Corps
after the 8th Corps moved out of Brownwood. and
whenever we interviewed the provost marshal
there were four majors and of the four majors he
said where did you come from where'd you come from
where'd you come from where'd you come from what
did you do before then i was the one who had been at
fort benny as a small arms instructor and then the
The provost marshal said, well, who's the senior
officer? And then he said, well, let's not look at
that. He said, we've got one man here with
experience in handling arms, so he'll be in charge
of this group. And we never knew who was the ranking
officer. Four majors, and I was in charge.
After being there a month, the 8th Corps was to move
out and we were to be in the 18th Corps. And on
Saturday, before the Corps was to move out Sunday
morning, I was called in and offered the job of
headquarters
company commandant to go to Europe with 8th Corps.
And I said to the chief of staff do i have to take it
and he said well no and i said well look you people
have known for 30 days that you were going overseas
and you've prepared your family and you've taken
your shots and you've done all of these things
necessary and i said if i have to do everything in
one day that you've had 30 days to do i won't be able
to see my wife have i got it the opportunity to
decline.
It had been a great assignment. But my wife and
daughter was out there that I wouldn't see. And I
said, well, I just am going to turn it down because I
don't want to leave my wife and daughter stranded
out there. And so I didn't go with them. When the
18th Corps was activated, I went out to Wachuga,
came back Christmas. And I'd been friendly with a
fellow that was in Wachuga with me, Wirtz and I. And
three days after we got back from Wachuga,
Wirtz was field officer of the day. And a request
came in for field grade officers to go on an
overseas assignment. And before I got there, he
had volunteered my name and his name to go on this
foreign assignment. Now, who is this? A fellow by
the name of Wirtz. W-E-R-T-Z? Yeah. And Wirtz and I
were together until we got to India. So you leave
Camp Bowie? We left Camp Bowie. On the 3rd or 4th of
January, and within five days, I reported to Camp
Meade in Maryland. And then to India? We stayed in
Camp Meade in Maryland for nearly three months.
And I went back home after we'd been there two or
three weeks and had been processed. They said, if
you've got any leave, why... you can take leave
now. And I took 15 days leave and went back home
about the end of February, first of March. And by
the way, when I went back home on that leave, we
ordered another baby in our family. And I didn't
know my wife was pregnant until I got the overhand
in Africa. And when I found out about it, I wrote
back, well, I knew it was going to happen because
every palm tree in Orianne had a stork on it. And we
stayed in Orianne for quite a long time. And then we
went on to Africa, and I was field officer of the day
on two occasions, going across the Atlantic. And
then when they left Orianne, it was five days later
until my turn came up. And the interesting thing,
as far as I'm concerned, is the fact that there were
four men that I outranked. And 245 that outranked
me. But one of them was,
can't get the name.
It'll come to him in a minute, maybe. But he later
came home and was in Eisenhower's cabinet as one of
the Army cabinet members. And then after he left
the cabinet, he was president of the University of
West Virginia. And in one of the last issues of a
magazine I got, he wrote a letter saying that we
were liaison officers. but nobody has written
anything about the liaison officers. I hope
somebody does. That was in one of the last issues
that I had. Elvis J. Starr was his name. S-T-A-R-R.
S-T-A-R-H. R-H, okay. Elvis J. S-T-A-R-H. And? I
really wouldn't recognize the man today if I saw
him, but I knew who he was when we were going. So you
go to Africa, then to India? Right.
On the trip from O-Ran, we found an American
soldier in the medical corps who was a native of
China who was sent to America to study art. And the
government said, we don't need any more art. You go
to University of Wisconsin and study
engineering. Very fluent in both English and
Chinese. And the stupid Americans sent him to
China not as an interpreter, but as a medical corps
man. And from the time we left Oran until we got to
Bombay, we studied Chinese two times a day. We
didn't know we were going to China until we were
halfway across the Atlantic. And when we opened
our stuff going across the Atlantic, we found a
Chinese language book there. And that told us
where we were going. And we had a man on the board
this year who was a principal from some town in
Newark, and he taught us contract bridge. I played
a lot of auction bridge when I was in A&M, but he
taught us contract bridge so that I got two things
on the trip from Oran to Bombay, how to play
contract and how to speak Chinese. And
I In all of my writings, I use a lot of Chinese terms,
many of them which I've forgotten. And much of the
material that's in my memoir about World War II is
refreshing of my memory by the letters that I wrote
my wife. Now, when did you arrive in China?
I was posted with the 64th Regiment as a regimental
liaison officer on the 22nd of June, 1944. And that
was the same time I got a job at San Gabriel at $90 a
month. And whenever the combat was over and we were
put back in the forest in reserve, a lieutenant
colonel came out there and took charge of it. And he
was left out there till it was ready to go back in
combat And they replaced him, and I took back my job
as regimental. But I was a battalion liaison
officer when he was in regiment. But as soon as it
got time to move out, he didn't go into combat.
Right. Briefly summarize your Chinese
experience then. I don't really have anything. I
don't have the bitterness that so many of the
people that were over there had. My comment would
be very friendly toward the Chinese. They were
more polite than I ever could be. One of my officers
that I was with told me that one of the differences
in culture between China and America was the fact
that Chinese did not give negative answers, and
that you had to be smart enough to know when a no was a
yes, or when a yes was a no. And many Americans
couldn't stand the lie that their counterpart.
And I never had any problem with it, but I'm
convinced that liaison officers were destroyed
in combat because they wouldn't
go along with this idea of having to make that
decision. And they'd talk to the Chinese about
lying and whatever and whatever and whatever. And
they'd walk down a trail and they'd say, well,
we've got to have a new liaison officer. And how
long were you over there? Well, I got to Burma. I got
to Bombay on the 2nd of June and I was in Calcutta for
two days and then I went from Calcutta to the
headquarters in in Burma within two days after we
got to Calcutta and I got there maybe the 15th
before I got down to my final assignment on the
22nd. And that's 1944? That's right. And you're in
the Far East until when? I flew out of Burma in an
airplane with four Mews on Christmas Day, 1944.
And I was flown into China because the Japanese
were threatening the last airport that the
Americans had in China. They had already captured
all the rest of them. But then this last airport was
very important. And we went down there about the
15th of April. And on the 8th of May, we were
entering combat. We heard about the German
surrender. The Japanese started moving back.
They
had put a
group of soldiers on top of a mountain, sometimes
two miles or three miles from the canyon. The
Chinese had to eradicate those groups up there.
regimented commander took me up to the top of a
mountain that they had captured. And there was a
hundred dead Japanese on that mountain,
unburied, when we got there. And that was one of the
most horrifying sights I've ever seen. Dead
soldiers and smell and so forth. Chinese removed
their dead. and buried them. How did you and your
colleagues know that the war in the Far East was
over? How did you learn that? Well, I was in
Chickaya, in that canyon, about 20 miles down the
canyon. And when I heard about the negotiations
for the surrender, I went to the headquarters. and
said, look, when am I going home? Because I had more
points than enough to go home. And they say, oh,
you've been frozen. You're going to Nanking. And
on the 2nd of September, we were standing beside an
airplane. And whenever the official notice came
that the Japanese had surrendered, we got on that
airplane. Four officers and maybe seven enlisted
men, and flew to Nanking. And I was working on the
airport at Nanking from the time that, from let's
say the 3rd of September until after the surrender
on Double Ten Day, October the 10th.
I never had, I was actually very fond of, the
regimental commander that I served with from the
time we left the
position back in the jungle. Colonel Lee was a very
fine man. That's L-I? L-E-E, way I'd pronounce it.
No, but it's spelled. Probably L-I.
And I did more I played bridge with Generalissimo,
not Generalissimo, the commanding general of the
22nd Division many times. While we were back, when
we weren't in combat, I played bridge a lot. I spent
a lot of time writing to my people. And we were told
to destroy anything that we had received. before
we moved out. And so my daughter was born on the 21st
of October, and I didn't know that she was here
until the 10th day of November. And there was a
squadron of, I mean, a unit of L-5 airplanes,
little airplanes that delivered things all over
the country. And they'd come by and say, what are
you doing today? And I said, oh, I don't have
anything to do. So they said, come go with me. And I
went all over Central Vermont while they were
airdropping mail to units or whatever. And one
time I looked up like that and there was the
Irrawaddy River right up there. That guy was
flying upside down. And then he started down. And
he made a lot of speed. But when he got to the ground,
the dust came up around us. And all of his buddies
came over there to find out why we crashed. And when
he got out of that airplane, his hand was shaking so
much he couldn't light his cigarette. He was going
to scare me, and he did. But I enjoyed flying. And
after I married, I dreamed about flying those. I
could fly those as well in my dreams as any of them
could over there. But I didn't really have
anything that made me bitter about the Chinese.
Alright, what about the Japanese? How did you and
your colleagues feel about the Japanese? Well, we
didn't like the Japanese. They called my name on
the next day after I joined my unit and said that
Major McNeil is with the 64th Regiment and he is not
a part of the Chinese Army, he's a spy. And if we
capture him, we'll treat him as a spy. Now, how,
they called you on the radio or what? No, they,
Tokyo Rose called. Tokyo Rose, okay. Somebody was
keeping them well informed about whatever
happened in Burma. Did you hear that broadcast?
See, I had a liaison team with me. I didn't have a
radio, but they had a radio and they listened to
Tokyo Rose and that's what they told me the next
day. I have the impression that those men who
fought in World War II in Europe have a far more
positive opinion today about their German
opponents than do the Americans who fought in the
Pacific have about their Japanese opponents. I
don't quite understand your statement. The
veterans of your generation who fought against
the Germans don't dislike them nearly as much as
the veterans who fought against the Japanese.
That's right. Why? Well, the Japanese have no
concept of anything but brutality. If they
captured an American officer in Burma, they
hanged him immediately. If you read about the
story of the rape of Nanking, you understand the
mentality of the Japanese. Did you see some of
those results personally? Not when I got to
Nanking. It had been years before. No, but I'm
talking about did you see some of their cruelty
anywhere else? Well, I don't know that I did, but I
also
heard so much about them that I despised the
Japanese. How did they treat the Chinese? They
treated them very badly. And on
one occasion, a
unit of battalions was ordered to capture the top
of a hill. They made 11 assaults to the top of the
hill and were not successful. And the regimental
commander went over to see what the problem was.
And he executed the commander of that battalion
and took charge of it. And he captured the top of
that hill. But there were only 79 soldiers that
were alive on top of that hill out of a battalion of
700 or 800 men. And when I questioned them about it,
they said, well, our soldiers are fatalists.
I don't know whether that's the right word or not.
But said if they got wounded, they got sent to a
hospital. If they got killed, They didn't have to
fight anymore. And the Chinese word that applies
to that is Meoganchi. What does it matter? And I
really had a good command
of the Chinese language when I was with them.
Right. Do you remember your reaction when you
heard about the first atomic bombs? I didn't know
anything about it, but Wirtz told me after we got to
China that they were working on it. Now, Wirtz was
in the office of General Hershey, and so he knew
things that I didn't know. All right, but what
about when you all heard that it had been dropped on
Japan? I wanted to go home.
What next?
You heard about the surrender, and how long was it
after you heard about the surrender before things
began to change and you all knew that you would get
to go home? Well,
we went to Nanking on the second day of September.
And we knew that we would be able to go home when we
completed our mission. When we completed our
mission, there was no supply people there. And the
arms that I had carried, I gave to the Chinese. And
they in turn gave me sabers. that were captured
from the Japanese officers. I have one out in my
garage, and I gave one to my son who went to Vietnam.
And he lost his when the house burned that he was
living in. It doesn't look like much now, but I've
got the Japanese saber yet. All right, so in
September, and then when did you get home? Well, I
left. Nan King spent a day or two in
Shanghai as a way station to Kunming. And I stayed
two or three days in Kunming and flew into
Calcutta. And I stayed in Calcutta for two or three
weeks. And they had a ship that was in there. And
they filled it up. They had so many rooms in that
ship that were for field grade officers. And they
came and said, now every one of the rooms
designated for field grade officers have been
taken.
They said, you can sign up to go home on enlisted
men's quarters, but you need to go see where it'll
be. And I said, look, where is the list to sign? that
you'd go home on enlisted men quarters. I didn't go
look at it. And I came home in the stairwell of, they
had a bunk, in the stairwell, and I slept in that
bunk. So when did you get home? Fifth day of
December. Of 1945. Right. Describe seeing family
and other loved ones Well, I had given Colonel
Miller a letter when he was in charge of the airport
after we took it over. And Colonel Miller came to
the airport, and I was the person that he saw. And I
want you to know he really was unhappy about what
was going on at Nanking, and he unloaded on me. And I
want you to know that that was one of the times that a
major unloaded on a colonel. And he came back, I
said, take my Jeep. And when he came back, he said,
Major, I owe you an apology. Said, you're the only
person in Nanking that's doing what they're
supposed to be doing. And he later came back and was
in, we got real well acquainted. One day,
He asked me to go eat in the headquarters of his uni.
And at that time, he made some snide remark about
the Kitty Corps. And I said, Colonel Miller, what
about your wife living in Alvin? He said, oh, how do
you know that? And I said, well, Your wife and my
wife are good friends. And I wrote a letter for him
to bring to my wife because he said, I'll be flying a
war-weary airplane home and be there in a week. And
he carried that letter. We went home on the same
ship. And he carried that letter in his pocket. And
when we got to Seattle, I got in line to call James.
And I stayed in that line for 10 hours, missed my
evening meal. And I called Jane, and I said, Jane,
we're here. I'm in Seattle. She said, I know that.
Colonel Miller's wife told me that three years
ago. You know how, well, you don't know. But it was
not anything it could have been. affected me the
way that did. I got into San Antonio, checked in,
went to spend the night with one of Jane's
relatives, got back in there the next morning, and
he walked in after I was halfway through
processing. And I said, Colonel Miller, have you
still got that letter? And he said, yes, I have, and
I'm going to give it to your wife. And he did. But he
carried it all the way. He said, I got grounded on an
airplane in Mountain Home in Idaho
and said we were snowed in for that long and said I
have got that letter for her. So when did you get
back to Alvin?
Well, I guess about the 6th or 7th of of December.
And if I remember correctly, we had bought this
farm. And as soon as I got home, we came first to
Moody, and Jane had rented a house in Moody, an
apartment. And I came to Moody within two or three
days from the time I left San Antonio. All right, so
you were then, very soon you were on inactive duty?
That's right. And I stayed in the reserve. What
were you planning to do as a civilian? I was going to
be on this farm for the rest of my life. And I was
going to be the rural carrier for Moody because
that was the best job they had in Moody. All right.
Take the story from there. back to A&M? Well, I
taught in the McClendon County Vocational School
for four years. And I was gone from home and so much.
And finally, I went into partnership with one of
the veterans. And while I was in that partnership,
I hurt my back and went to Dallas and spent from
Thanksgiving Day, 1947 1950 to 15th of March 1950.
And when I got home,
I knew that I had just less than three months to get
into the veterans training program. So I went to
A&M on the 1st of June and enrolled. Because July
the 15th was the date that you had to make. And left
the kids here. My wife took me to Marlin every
morning. I went to A&M and stayed until Friday and
came back. She met me in Marlin sometime Friday
afternoon or Saturday morning. How had A&M
changed since you left it? And those... eight
years or so? Well, the biggest change was the fact
that A&M was flooded with veterans. And they
told a story that I told my class. And this story was
that they put all of the all of the Army veterans out
at Bryan Air Force Base. And they had a prof that
went out to the Air Corps base to teach classes. And
he'd go out there and get his room ready to preach
and put his hat on the table. And when they put his
hat on the table, then he'd go to one of the mess
halls and drink coffee with the mess sergeant. And
he was late coming back. And when he got back, there
wasn't anybody in the room. They swapped him. And
so the next day, when they came back in, there was a
big sign on the front of the door on the wall. I gave a
test yesterday and all of you made zero. And they
started howling.
And he said, well, that's the way it is. You walk my
class. And when he came to the classroom the next
day, the hat, there was a hat on every room. And I
told my class that. Have you heard that story
before? And I want you to know that I kept an
accurate record of attendance while I was at A&M.
And I never had a class to walk me while I was
teaching. I was on the program one time and the
graduate student was supposed to teach my class,
but he forgot and they walked him, but they never
walked me while I taught. Now you enrolled in 1950
and what was your goal in terms of a degree at that
point? Well, I had already